Every time the subject of USB fingerprint scanners comes up in conversation I hear about how insecure they are, and how easily they are fooled. The general consensus is that no self respecting computer nerd would use a fingerprint scanner, for any purpose.

<!-- more -->

Yes, I too have seen that episode of Mythbusters where Adam and Jaime fool a very expensive system with relative ease. Yes, I agree it would be unwise to secure extremely sensitive systems and data with only a fingerprint. These aren't the only use cases. Note that this discussion is mostly concerning system security as it relates to user privileges: encrypted data isn't within the scope of what I'm about to say. Encrypt your data with a key or good passphrase!

You might be familiar with the adage, "if an attacker has physical access to a system, assume that system is compromised". It doesn't matter what kind of software blocks you have in place, an attacker can bypass them. If someone is willing to go so far as to lift your fingerprint to spoof a scanner, I'd say they're pretty motivated to get into your system. Not using a USB fingerprint scanner for your computer login is not going to keep this guy out.
Still, it is correct that your fingerprint is theoretically less secure than a good password for physical access to your device- we just have to remember two things: the more likely threat you should be defending yourself against is remote access, and Average Joe does not have a good password. Above Average Joe might have a great password, but doesn't want to type it every time he needs to elevate a process in Windows, so Above Average Joe will disable UAC and/or run an administrative account. Both Joes are fairly vulnerable to remote attacks. Now, Windows UAC has excellent fingerprint scanner support: a scanner allows Average Joe to create a good password (writing it on paper hidden in a lock box so it is not forgotten), and allows Above Average Joe to keep his strong password without having to type it into every UAC prompt that pops up. The fingerprint scanner is not any more susceptible to remote attacks than a password- it is in fact arguably safer: if you're not typing your password, you're not giving key loggers the chance to snatch your password. Worth noting that key loggers come in software and physical-device hardware variants; fingerprint scanners will shield you from both.

We can nit pick over the relative chances of someone obtaining your fingerprint and using it to gain access to your system vs someone installing a key logger in the back of your PC while you aren't looking, but I don't think that line of discussion leads anywhere productive. Fact of the matter is both methods of attack are equally trivial, but fingerprint scanners are more convenient for the user while also adding a layer of defense against inadvertently installed trojan key loggers.

This turned out to be a mess, so I'll summarize my key points:

* Defends against key loggers looking for passwords
* Convenience in authentication means users might be open to stricter security policies
* Average Joe creates weak passwords because he doesn't want to rememberor frequently type a good password; using fingerprint authenticationrelieves AJ of this worry while still allowing him to enjoy the benefits of a password that won't be easily guessed or cracked.

I'm aware that there are still problems: while fingerprint authentication is effectively perfect on and within Windows, on Linux the fingerprint support is **miserable** and broken. On Windows you're given a box which you can start typing your password into, or swipe your finger. On Linux (via PAM) fingerprint authentication is a module and password authentication is another, separate module. This means that when the fingerprint module bugs out (and it will bug out), you have to wait 1-2 minutes for the timeout to occur, when the next module loads and you're finally allowed to just type in the password. Ctrl+C won't save you here. Another issue I frequently run into: programs that wrap around sudo don't display a prompt when sudo invokes the fingerprint scanner module- you just have to know the process isn't frozen, it's waiting for your finger. Probably. If your finger doesn't work, it's probably not frozen and will ask you for a password in 2 minutes. Probably. It should be easy enough to create a PAM module that accepts both password and fingerprint simultaneously, but I don't know how easy it will be to fix the fingerprint driver (fprintd). I'm not holding my breath for either of those things to be fixed, though.

It’s worth mentioning at this point there’s also the potential problem of over enthusiastic law enforcement. You can’t withhold your fingerprint from the law, and if you’ve been detained, there’s really nothing stopping an officer from gaining access to your fingerprint enabled phone, where they would otherwise need to ask you to unlock it for them- at which point you should consult a lawyer. As mentioned above, sensitive information is best secured with encryption and a strong passphrase/key.

Fingerprint authentication would also be great for website login, but you can only achieve this with Lastpass, and I believe only on Firefox and only on Windows. It's not that polished and the feature is not a priority for the dev team. Still, I do use Lastpass with my fingerprint scanners and it is passable. The convenience allows me to set my cookies to expire daily- all it takes for me to log in is to swipe my finger, so where I previously stayed logged into various sites for weeks at a time, now I have no qualms about needing to log into any given site when I sit down at the computer. This minimizes what tracking cookies (potentially from services I use) can observe, and (extreme paranoia incoming) prevents someone with physical access to my devices from looking through my social media/etc accounts.
